# Introduction to objects and variables

## Key Insights

### Data & Values

Programs are a collection of instructions that manipulate data to get desired output.

### Random Access Memory (RAM)

- tldr; All the data related to the program are stored in RAM(while the program is running). And can be retrieved when needed.
- note; In some older programming languages (like Applesoft BASIC), you could directly access these boxes (e.g. you could write a statement to “go get the value stored in mailbox number 7532”).

### Objects and variables

- Objects in C++ can be unnamed (anonymous), more often we name our objects using an identifier. An object with a name is called a variable
- An object is used to store a value in memory. A variable is an object that has a name (identifier). Naming our objects let us refer to them again later in the program.
- Nomenclature : In general programming, the term object typically refers to an unnamed object in memory, a variable, or a function. In C++, the term object has a narrower definition that excludes functions.

### Summary

In C++, we use objects to access memory. A named object is called a variable. Variables have an identifier, a type, and a value (and some other attributes that aren’t relevant here). A variable’s type is used to determine how the value in memory should be interpreted.

### Quiz

1. Data?      : Data is any information that can be moved, processed, or stored by a computer.
2. Value?     : A value is a letter (eg : a), number (eg : 5), text (eg : sometext) that can be represented as data.
3. Variable?  : A variable is a named region in memory that is used to store values. A variable points to the data in memory we use the variable to access data associated with the variable. 
4. identifier : An identifier is the name that a variable is accessed by.
5. type       : A type tells the program how to interpret a value in memory.

