[1.5 — Introduction to iostream: cout, cin, and endl](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-iostream-cout-cin-and-endl/)

# Tip

Read this turorial, again it migh have different error cases.

# std::cout is Buffered

```c++
std::cout << "print this to the console";
```

If the program encounters this statement instead of immedietly printing it to the standard out or console the program will copy it to buffer; a region in memory where set aside to collect such requests. Periodically the **buffer** gets **flushed** meaning all the data collected in the buffer will be sent to it's destination (in this case to the console).

### std::endl flushes the buffer and '\n' prints buffer.

when ever the program encounters **std::endl** it will send all the contents in the buffer to the console and **flushes** the buffer that is just remove the stored contents in the buffer. where as `\n` will just print the entire buffer contents before the **new line** character.

### Example

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <chrono>
#include <thread>

int main()
{
    std::cout << "This will stay in the buffer ";
    // any thing in between these two print statements will be executed without any issues
    int a{1}, b{2};
    int c {a + b};
    // the above code executes without any issues
    std::this_thread::sleep_for(std::chrono::seconds(5));
    std::cout << "Until a newline or flush is encountered." << std::endl;
}
```

You may think that this statement **This will stay in the buffer** will be sent to the **standard out** or console and then it will wait for **5** seconds to print the next statement.. but that is not the case here.

What happens is that the first print statement is copied to the buffer as there is not **\n** character nothing will be sent to the console, it will just stay in the buffer. And it will wait for **5** seconds and then as the program encounters another print statement it will copy that statement into the buffer but not there is an **std::endl** now the program will print the entire buffer and then flushes the buffer.

This is an overview..

1. encountered cout      : "This will stay in the buffer" -> copy this to buffer.
2. wait for **5**seconds
3. encountered cout      : "Until a newline or flush is encountered." -> copy this to buffer.
4. encountered std::endl : print the buffer contents and flushes / clear the buffer.
5. Finally after **5** seconds this will be printed to the standard out.

standard out : This will stay in the buffer Until a newline or flush is encountered.

### Key insight

The opposite of buffered output is unbuffered output. With unbuffered output, each individual output request is sent directly to the output device.

Writing data to a buffer is typically fast, whereas transferring a batch of data to an output device is comparatively slow. Buffering can significantly increase performance by minimizing the number of slow transfers that need to be performed when there are multiple output requests.

<!-- ### Extraction & Insertion Operator -->
<!---->
<!-- This **<<** is Insertion Operator and this **>>** is Extraction Operator. **std::cout** uses **<<** to insert contents into buffer, and **std::cin** uses **>>** operator to extract input given by user from console -->
<!---->


# std::cin is buffered

**std::cin** reads input from keyboard. We use extraction operator **>>** to put input data in a variable.

```c++
int main()
{
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;
    std::cout << x;
    return 0;
}
```

We can take multiple inputs using a single statement.

```c++
int main()
{
    int x{};
    int y{};

    std::cout << "Enter two numbers : ";

    std::cin >> x >> y;

    return 0;
}
```

When you get this prompt in the console you should either seperate the two inputs by space or by a new line.

```console
Enter two numbers : 3 4
```

or

```console
Enter two numbers : 3
4
```


# std::cin is buffered

We know **std::cout** is buffered and is a two stage process :

- The data from each output request i.e each **std::cout** statement is added (to the end) of the output buffer.

- Later data from (the front of) output buffer is flushed to the output devide (console).

Similarly, inputting data is also a two stage process.

- The individual characters from the console are added the end of the input buffer (inside **std::cin**). The enter key (pressed to submit data) is also stored as a '\n' character.

- The extraction operator **>>** removes character from the front of the input buffer and converts them into a value that is assigned to the associated variable. This variable can be used in subsequent statements.

### Explanation

Let's take an example and understand buffered behaviour of **std::cin**

```c++
#include <iostream>  // for std::cout and std::cin

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter two numbers: ";

    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

    int y{};
    std::cin >> y;

    std::cout << "You entered " << x << " and " << y << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

We'll run this program twice.

#### Run 1

When `std::cin >> x` is encountered, the program will wait for input. Then Enter the value `3`. The input `3\n` goes into the input buffer and the value `3` is extraced to variable `x`. After extracting `3` it will be removed from the buffer.


When `std::cin >> y` is encountered again, the program will wait for input. Then Enter the value `4`. The input `4\n` goes into the input buffer and the value `4` is extraced to variable `y`. After extracting `4` it will be removed from the buffer.

There is nothing strange about this run, it ran as intended.

#### Run 2

When `std::cin >> x` is encountered the program will wait for input. Then Enter the values `3 4`. The input `3 4\n` goes into the input buffer, but only `3` is extraced to variable `x` (extraction stops at the space). And `3` will be removed from the input buffer.

When `std::cin >> y` is encountered the program will **not** wait for input. Instead, the value `4` that is still in the input buffer is extraced to variable `y`. And `4` will be removed from the input buffer. And the program prints **you entered 3 and 4**.


#### Note

In Run 2 the program did not wait for the user to enter additional input when extracting to variable `y` because there was already prior input in the input buffer that could be used.


### Key Insight

`std::cin` is buffered because it allows us to seperate the entering of input from , the extract of input. We can enter input once and then perform multiple extraction requests on it.

### std::cin with another example

```c++
int main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
    std::cout << "Enter two numbers: ";

    int x {}; // initialize with a value at declaration. This defaults to 0
    int y {};
    int z {};

    std::cin >> x;
    std::cin >> y;
    std::cin >> z;

    std::cout << "x : " << x << ", y : " << y << ", z : " << z << '\n';
    return 0;
}

```

#### Run 1

When `std::cin >> x` is encountered enter `3 4 5`. Now `3` is extraced to `x` and we know why. 

When `std::cin >> y` is encountered the program will not wait for input instead it will extraced the value in the front of input buffer i.e `4` and when it encounters space it will stop extraction.


When `std::cin >> z` is encountered the program will not wait for input instead it will extraced the value in the front of input buffer i.e `5` and when it encounters space it will stop extraction.

And at the end it will print `x : 3, y : 4, z : 5`.

#### Run 2


When `std::cin >> x` is encountered enter `3 4`. Now `3` is extraced to `x` and as the cin encounters space it will stop extraction.


When `std::cin >> y` is encountered the program will not wait for input instead it will extraced the value in the front of input buffer i.e `4` and when it encounters space it will stop extraction.

When `std::cin >> z` is encountered the program will wait for input as there is nothing left in the input buffer, both `3 4` are flushed from the buffer. Now enter `5`, and it will be extraced to `z`.

#### Key takeaway from both runs

If there is any input left in the input buffer the extraction operator will extract whatever value is at the front / beginning of the buffer seperated by space or new line. If there is nothing left in the input buffer it will wait for user input and then adds it to the front of the input buffer.


# The basic extraction process (**imp**)

1. First, leading whitespaces (spaces, tabs, newlines at the front of the buffer) is discarded from the input buffer. This will discard any unextraced newline character remaingin from a prior line of input.

Example :

If the program asks for a user input for variable `x` and we enter this in the console `               3           ` it will discard all the leading whitespaces for `3` and just considers `3`. And for the spaces after `3` we know that if operator `>>` encounters spaces it will stop extraction.

#### TODO : what happens for trailing whitespaces for a string

2. If the input buffer is now empty, operator `>>` will wait for the user to enter more data. Leading whitespace is again discarded.

3. operator `>>` then extraces as many sonsecutive characters as it can, until it encounters either a newline character (representing the end of the line of input) or a character that is not valud for the variable being extracted to i.e if we input `s` for a variable that is of type `int` it will stop.

The result of the extraction is as follows:

- If any characters were extraced in step 3 above, extraction is success. The extraced characters are converted into a value that is then assigned to the variable.

- If no characters could be extracted in step 3 above, extraction has failed. The object being extracted to is assigned the value 0 (as of c++11), and any future extractions will immediately fail (until `std::cin` is cleared)

    Any non-extraced characters (including newlines) remains available for the next extraction attempt.

#### Explanation (ChatGpt):

It means that when the `>>` operator fails to read data due to an error (like incorrect input format), it affects the entire input stream (`std::cin`). Here's what happens:

1. **Immediate Failure**: After a failure, `std::cin` enters an error state. This state means that any attempt to read from `std::cin` will immediately fail as well.

2. **Need to Reset**: To fix this and allow further input operations to work again, you need to reset or clear the error state of `std::cin`. This is done using `std::cin.clear()`.

3. **Unprocessed Input**: Any input that was not processed (because of the failure) remains in the input buffer. You might need to remove or handle this leftover input to continue correctly.

In summary, if `>>` fails, `std::cin` gets stuck in an error state until you clear it, and you may need to deal with any remaining, unprocessed input.

#### Example

```c++
int x{};
std::cin >> x;
```

If the user types `5a` and enter, `5a\n` will be added to the buffer. `5` will be extracted, converted to an integer, and assigned to variable x. `a\n` will be left in the input buffer for the next extraction.

If the user types `b` and enter, `b\n` would be added to the buffer. Because `b` is not a valid integer, no characters can be extracted, so this is an extraction failure. Variable x would be set to `0`, and future extractions will fail until the input stream is cleared.

