[1.7 — Keywords and naming identifiers](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/keywords-and-naming-identifiers/)

### Identifier naming rules

As a reminder, the name of a variable (or function, type, or other kind of item) is called an identifier. C++ gives you a lot of flexibility to name identifiers as you wish. However, there are a few rules that must be followed when naming identifiers:

- The identifier can not be a keyword. Keywords are reserved.

- The identifier can only be composed of letters (lower or upper case), numbers, and the underscore character. That means the name can not contain symbols (except the underscore) nor whitespace (spaces or tabs).

- The identifier must begin with a letter (lower or upper case) or an underscore. It can not start with a number.

- C++ is case sensitive, and thus distinguishes between lower and upper case letters. nvalue is different than nValue is different than NVALUE.

### Identifier naming best practices

It is a convention in C++ that variable names should begin with a lowercase letter. If the variable name is a single word or acronym, the whole thing should be written in lowercase letters.

check example [here](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/keywords-and-naming-identifiers/) under Identifier naming best practices.

### Key points

- Identifier names that start with a capital letter are typically used for user-defined types (such as structs, classes, and enumerations, all of which we will cover later).

- You should avoid naming your identifiers starting with an underscore, as these names are typically reserved for OS, library, and/or compiler use.

- Your identifiers should make clear what the value they are holding means.

For variable declarations, it is useful to use a comment to describe what a variable is going to be used for, or to explain anything else that might not be obvious. For example, say we’ve declared a variable named **numberOfChars** that is supposed to store the number of characters in a piece of text. Does the text “Hello World!” have 10, 11, or 12 characters? It depends on whether we’re including whitespace or punctuation. Rather than naming the variable **numberOfCharsIncludingWhitespaceAndPunctuation** , which is rather lengthy, a well placed comment on or above the declaration line should help the user figure it out:

```c++
// a count of the number of chars in a piece of text, including whitespace and punctuation
int numberOfChars;
```

