[2.1 — Introduction to functions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-functions/)

A **function** is a reusable sequence of statements designed to do a particular job.

A function call is an expression that tell the **CPU** to interrupt the current function and execute the other function. The cpu puts a **"mark"** at the current point of execution and then **calls** the other function and starts executing the **called** function, and when it is done executing the function it gets back to the point where the function call was made.

Consider a case that might occur in real life: you’re reading a book, when you remember you need to make a phone call. You put a bookmark in your book, make the phone call, and when you are done with the phone call, you return to the place you bookmarked and continue your book precisely where you left off.

The function initiating the function call is the **caller** and the function being called is the **callee** or **called** function.


### User-defined functions

Function Syntax

```c++
returnType functionName() // This is the function header (tells the compiler about the existence of the function)
{
    // This is the function body (tells the compiler what the function does)
}
```

Just like variables have names, so do user-defined functions. The **functionName** is the name (identifier) of user-defined function.


Example

```c++
void doPrint()
{
    std::cout << "In doPrint()\n";
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Starting main()\n";
    doPrint(); // Interrupt main() by making a function call to doPrint().  main() is the caller.
    std::cout << "Ending main()\n"; // this statement is executed after doPrint() ends

    return 0;
}
```

Because a function call was made, execution of statements in main is suspended, and execution jumps to the top of called function doPrint. The first (and only) line in doPrint prints In doPrint(). When doPrint terminates, execution returns back to the caller (here: function main) and resumes from the point where it left off. Consequently, the next statement executed in main prints Ending main().
