[2.2 — Function return values (value-returning functions)](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/function-return-values-value-returning-functions/)

c++ disallows calling `main()` function explicitly

c does allow `main()` function to be called explicitly, so some c++ compilers will allow this for compatablility reasons.

### This works in c

```c
main()
{
    printf("Hello");
    main();
    return 0;
}
```

Calls main function "recursively"... causing seg fault.

A value-returning function that does not return a value will produce undefined behavior. A function is value-returning if the return type is anything other than **void**.

### Function main will implicitly return 0 if no return statement is provided

The only exception to the rule that a value-returning function must return a value via a return statement is for function main(). The function main() will implicitly return the value 0 if no return statement is provided. That said, it is best practice to explicitly return a value from main, both to show your intent, and for consistency with other functions (which will exhibit undefined behavior if a return value is not specified).

### Functions can only return a single value

A value-returning function can only return a single value back to the caller each time it is called.

Note that the value provided in a return statement doesn’t need to be literal -- it can be the result of any valid expression, including a variable or even a call to another function that returns a value.

There are various ways to work around the limitation of functions only being able to return a single value, which we’ll cover in future lessons.

### Conclusion

Return values provide a way for functions to return a single value back to the function’s caller.

### Intrestring...

Apparently this will compile... and outputs `1`

```c++
#include <iostream>

int returnFive()
{
    return 5;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << returnFive << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

throws a warning : `clang: Address of function 'returnFive' will always evaluate to 'true' (fix available) [-Wpointer-bool-conversion]`




