[2.9 — Naming collisions and an introduction to namespaces](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/naming-collisions-and-an-introduction-to-namespaces/)

C++ requires all identifiers to be non-ambiguous (not open to more than one interpretation). If two identical identifiers are introduced to the same program in a way that compiler or linker can't tell them apart, then the compiler or linker will produce an error. This error is generally referred to as a **naming collision** or **naming conflict**.

If the colliding identifiers belong to same file then the result will be a compiler error. If the colliding identifiers are in different files belonging to the same program then the result will be a linker error.

#### Scope regions

A **scope region** is an area in source code where all identifiers are considered to be distinct from names defined in different scope region. Two identifiers with the same name can be defined in different scope regions without causing naming conflicts. However, within a given scope region, all identifiers should be unique, otherwise this will result in a naming collision.

The body of a function is one example of a scope region. Two identifiers with same name can be defined in different functions without any naming collisions. If we define two identical identifiers in the same function then it will result in a naming collision, and the compiler will complain.

#### Namespaces

A **namespace** provides another type of scope region (called **namespace scope**) that allows you to declare names inside of it for the purpose of disambiguation. Any names defined in the namespace are considered to be unique, and won't be mistaken for identical names in other scopes.


```markdown
Key insight

A name declared in a given scope region won't be mistaken for an identical name declared in a different scope.
```

A namespace is used to group all the related identifiers in one place. If you put all your `math` related functions and identifiers in a namespace they won't collode with similar identifiers outside the scope of `math` namespace.

#### The global namespace

In c++, any name that is not defined inside a function, class, or a namespace is considered to be part of an implisitly-defined namespace called **global namespace** (also called as **global scope**).

In any given c++ code file the `main` function is in **global namespace** and any other function **forward declared** or defined is considered to be in the global namespace. And any identifier defined after `include` statement and before `main` function is considered to be a **global identifier** we can access this identifier in any function or class or namespace.

The life time of a global identifier is, from the time of definition till the end of the file.

Although variables can be defined in global scope it is not recommended or should be avoided.

- Example

```c++
#include <iostream> // imports the declaration of std::cout into the global scope

// All of the following statements are part of the global namespace

void foo();    // okay: function forward declaration
int x;         // compiles but strongly discouraged: non-const global variable definition (without initializer)
int y { 5 };   // compiles but strongly discouraged: non-const global variable definition (with initializer)
x = 5;         // compile error: executable statements are not allowed in namespaces

int main()     // okay: function definition
{
    return 0;
}

void goo();    // okay: A function forward declaration
```
- Executable statements are not allowed in user defined or global namespaces.

- Use explicit namespace prefixes to accessing identifiers defined in a namespace.

- When an identifier is declared using a namespace prefixe, the identifier is called a **qualified name**.

- avoid using **using-directive** statements, ex `using namespace std`. They violate the reason why namespaces are added in the first place.


#### Curly braces & indented code

- Curly braces are often used to delinate scope region that is nested within another scope region. Functions defined in global scope region uses braces to seperate it from the global scope.

- In certain cases identifiers defined outside the curly braces may still be the part of the scope defined by the curly braces, an example for that is functions parameters.

```c++
#include <iostream> // imports the declaration of std::cout into the global scope

void foo(int x) // foo is defined in the global scope, x is defined within scope of foo()
{ // braces used to delineate nested scope region for function foo()
    std::cout << x << '\n';
} // x goes out of scope here

int main()
{ // braces used to delineate nested scope region for function main()
    foo(5);

    int x { 6 }; // x is defined within the scope of main()
    std::cout << x << '\n';

    return 0;
} // x goes out of scope here
// foo and main (and std::cout) go out of scope here (the end of the file)
```
